<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title>At Sea</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/igp-gdm-sa.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
	<div class="galley-rw">
		<section class="body-rw Chapter-rw r9 pi-remix" id="Chapter7-r9" epub:type="bodymatter chapter">


         <div class="title-block-rw" id="title-block7-r9">


            <span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_187" epub:type="pagebreak">187</span><h1 id="h17-r9">At Sea
            </h1>

         </div>

         <p id="p302-r9"><span class="dropcap-rw">T</span><span class="smallcaps-rw">he following paragraphs</span> recently appeared in the papers:
         </p>

         <p class="firstpara-rw" id="p303-r9">&#8220;Boulogne-Sur-Mer, January 22.&#8212;Our correspondent writes:</p>

         <p id="p304-r9">&#8220;A fearful accident has thrown our sea-faring population, which has suffered so much in the last two years, into the greatest consternation. The fishing smack commanded by Captain Javel, on entering the harbor was wrecked on the rocks of the harbor breakwater.</p>

         <p id="p305-r9">&#8220;In spite of the efforts of the life boat and the shooting of life lines from the shore four sailors and the cabin boy were lost.</p>

         <p id="p306-r9">&#8220;The rough weather continues. Fresh disasters are anticipated.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p307-r9">Who is this Captain Javel? Is he the brother of the one-armed man?</p>

         <p id="p308-r9">If the poor man tossed about in the waves and dead, perhaps, beneath his wrecked boat, is the one I am thinking of, he took part, just eighteen years ago, in another tragedy, terrible and simple as are all these fearful tragedies of the sea.</p>

         <p id="p309-r9">Javel, senior, was then master of a trawling smack.</p>

         <p id="p310-r9">The trawling smack is the ideal fishing boat. So solidly built that it fears no weather, with a round bottom, tossed about unceasingly on the waves like a cork, always on top, always thrashed by the harsh salt winds of the English Channel, it ploughs the sea unweariedly with bellying sail, dragging along<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_188" epub:type="pagebreak">188</span> at its side a huge trawling net, which scours the depths of the ocean, and detaches and gathers in all the animals asleep in the rocks, the flat fish glued to the sand, the heavy crabs with their curved claws, and the lobsters with their pointed mustaches.
         </p>

         <p id="p311-r9">When the breeze is fresh and the sea choppy, the boat starts in to trawl. The net is fastened all along a big log of wood clamped with iron and is let down by two ropes on pulleys at either end of the boat. And the boat, driven by the wind and the tide, draws along this apparatus which ransacks and plunders the depths of the sea.</p>

         <p id="p312-r9">Javel had on board his younger brother, four sailors and a cabin boy. He had set sail from Boulogne on a beautiful day to go trawling.</p>

         <p id="p313-r9">But presently a wind sprang up, and a hurricane obliged the smack to run to shore. She gained the English coast, but the high sea broke against the rocks and dashed on the beach, making it impossible to go into port, filling all the harbor entrances with foam and noise and danger.</p>

         <p id="p314-r9">The smack started off again, riding on the waves, tossed, shaken, dripping, buffeted by masses of water, but game in spite of everything; accustomed to this boisterous weather, which sometimes kept it roving between the two neighboring countries without its being able to make port in either.</p>

         <p id="p315-r9">At length the hurricane calmed down just as they were in the open, and although the sea was still high the captain gave orders to cast the net.</p>

         <p id="p316-r9">So it was lifted overboard, and two men in the bows and two in the stern began to unwind the ropes that held it. It suddenly touched bottom, but a big wave made the boat heel, and Javel, junior, who was in the bows directing the lowering of the net, staggered, and his arm was caught in the rope which the shock had slipped from the pulley for an instant. He made a desperate effort to raise the rope with the other hand, but the net was down and the taut rope did not give.<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_189" epub:type="pagebreak">189</span>
         </p>

         <p id="p317-r9">The man cried out in agony. They all ran to his aid. His brother left the rudder. They all seized the rope, trying to free the arm it was bruising. But in vain. &#8220;We must cut it,&#8221; said a sailor, and he took from his pocket a big knife, which, with two strokes, could save young Javel&#8217;s arm.</p>

         <p id="p318-r9">But if the rope were cut the trawling net would be lost, and this net was worth money, a great deal of money, fifteen hundred francs. And it belonged to Javel, senior, who was tenacious of his property.</p>

         <p id="p319-r9">&#8220;No, do not cut, wait, I will luff,&#8221; he cried, in great distress. And he ran to the helm and turned the rudder. But the boat scarcely obeyed it, being impeded by the net which kept it from going forward, and prevented also by the force of the tide and the wind.</p>

         <p id="p320-r9">Javel, junior, had sunk on his knees, his teeth clenched, his eyes haggard. He did not utter a word. His brother came back to him, in dread of the sailor&#8217;s knife.</p>

         <p id="p321-r9">&#8220;Wait, wait,&#8221; he said. &#8220;We will let down the anchor.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p322-r9">They cast anchor, and then began to turn the capstan to loosen the moorings of the net. They loosened them at length and disengaged the imprisoned arm, in its bloody woolen sleeve.</p>

         <p id="p323-r9">Young Javel seemed like an idiot. They took off his jersey and saw a horrible sight, a mass of flesh from which the blood spurted as if from a pump. Then the young man looked at his arm and murmured: &#8220;Foutu&#8221; (done for).</p>

         <p id="p324-r9">Then, as the blood was making a pool on the deck of the boat, one of the sailors cried: &#8220;He will bleed to death, we must bind the vein.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p325-r9">So they took a cord, a thick, brown, tarry cord, and twisting it around the arm above the wound, tightened it with all their might. The blood ceased to spurt by slow degrees, and, presently, stopped altogether.</p>

         <p id="p326-r9">Young Javel rose, his arm hanging at his side. He took hold of it with the other hand, raised it, turned it over, shook it. It<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_190" epub:type="pagebreak">190</span> was all mashed, the bones broken, the muscles alone holding it together. He looked at it sadly, reflectively. Then he sat down on a folded sail and his comrades advised him to keep wetting the arm constantly to prevent it from mortifying.
         </p>

         <p id="p327-r9">They placed a pail of water beside him, and every few minutes he dipped a glass into it and bathed the frightful wound, letting the clear water trickle on to it.</p>

         <p id="p328-r9">&#8220;You would be better in the cabin,&#8221; said his brother. He went down, but came up again in an hour, not caring to be alone. And, besides, he preferred the fresh air. He sat down again on his sail and began to bathe his arm.</p>

         <p id="p329-r9">They made a good haul. The broad fish with their white bellies lay beside him, quivering in the throes of death; he looked at them as he continued to bathe his crushed flesh.</p>

         <p id="p330-r9">As they were about to return to Boulogne the wind sprang up anew, and the little boat resumed its mad course, bounding and tumbling about, shaking up the poor wounded man.</p>

         <p id="p331-r9">Night came on. The sea ran high until dawn. As the sun rose the English coast was again visible, but, as the weather had abated a little, they turned back towards the French coast, tacking as they went.</p>

         <p id="p332-r9">Towards evening Javel, junior, called his comrades and showed them some black spots, all the horrible tokens of mortification in the portion of the arm below the broken bones.</p>

         <p id="p333-r9">The sailors examined it, giving their opinion.</p>

         <p id="p334-r9">&#8220;That might be the &#8220;Black,&#8221; thought one.</p>

         <p id="p335-r9">&#8220;He should put salt water on it,&#8221; said another.</p>

         <p id="p336-r9">They brought some salt water and poured it on the wound. The injured man became livid, ground his teeth and writhed a little, but did not exclaim.</p>

         <p id="p337-r9">Then, as soon as the smarting had abated, he said to his brother:</p>

         <p id="p338-r9">&#8220;Give me your knife.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p339-r9">The brother handed it to him.</p>

         <p id="p340-r9">&#8220;Hold my arm up, quite straight, and pull it.&#8221;<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_191" epub:type="pagebreak">191</span>
         </p>

         <p id="p341-r9">They did as he asked them.</p>

         <p id="p342-r9">Then he began to cut off his arm. He cut gently, carefully, severing al the tendons with this blade that was sharp as a razor. And, presently, there was only a stump left. He gave a deep sigh and said:</p>

         <p id="p343-r9">&#8220;It had to be done. It was done for.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p344-r9">He seemed relieved and breathed loud. He then began again to pour water on the stump of arm that remained.</p>

         <p id="p345-r9">The sea was still rough and they could not make the shore.</p>

         <p id="p346-r9">When the day broke, Javel, junior, took the severed portion of his arm and examined it for a long time. Gangrene had set in. His comrades also examined it and handed it from one to the other, feeling it, turning it over, and sniffing at it.</p>

         <p id="p347-r9">&#8220;You must throw that into the sea at once,&#8221; said his brother.</p>

         <p id="p348-r9">But Javel, junior, got angry.</p>

         <p id="p349-r9">&#8220;Oh, no! Oh, no! I don&#8217;t want to. It belongs to me, does it not, as it is my arm?&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p350-r9">And he took and placed it between his feet.</p>

         <p id="p351-r9">&#8220;It will putrefy, just the same,&#8221; said the older brother. Then an idea came to the injured man. In order to preserve the fish when the boat was long at sea, they packed it in salt, in barrels. He asked:</p>

         <p id="p352-r9">&#8220;Why can I not put it in pickle?&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p353-r9">&#8220;Why, that&#8217;s a fact,&#8221; exclaimed the others.</p>

         <p id="p354-r9">Then they emptied one of the barrels, which was full from the haul of the last few days; and right at the bottom of the barrel they laid the detached arm. They covered it with salt, and then put back the fish one by one.</p>

         <p id="p355-r9">One of the sailors said by way of joke:</p>

         <p id="p356-r9">&#8220;I hope we do not sell it at auction.&#8221;</p>

         <p id="p357-r9">And everyone laughed, except the two Javels.</p>

         <p id="p358-r9">The wind was still boisterous. They tacked within sight of Boulogne until the following morning at ten o&#8217;clock. Young Javel continued to bathe his wound. From time to time he rose and walked from one end to the other of the boat.<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_192" epub:type="pagebreak">192</span>
         </p>

         <p id="p359-r9">His brother, who was at the tiller, followed him with glances, and shook his head.</p>

         <p id="p360-r9">At last they ran into harbor.</p>

         <p id="p361-r9">The doctor examined the wound and pronounced it to be in good condition. He dressed it properly and ordered the patient to rest. But Javel would not go to bed until he got back his severed arm, and he returned at once to the dock to look for the barrel which he had marked with a cross.</p>

         <p id="p362-r9">It was emptied before him and he seized the arm, which was well preserved in the pickle, had shrunk and was freshened. He wrapped it up in a towel he had brought for the purpose and took it home.</p>

         <p id="p363-r9">His wife and children looked for a long time at this fragment of their father, feeling the fingers, and removing the grains of salt that were under the nails. Then they sent for a carpenter to make a little coffin.</p>

         <p id="p364-r9">The next day the entire crew of the trawling smack followed the funeral of the detached arm. The two brothers, side by side, led the procession; the parish beadle carried the corpse under his arm.</p>

         <p id="p365-r9">Javel, junior, gave up the sea. He obtained a small position on the dock, and when he subsequently talked about his accident, he would say confidentially to his auditors:</p>

         <p id="p366-r9">&#8220;If my brother had been willing to cut away the net, I should still have my arm, that is sure. But he was thinking only of his property.&#8221;</p>

         

      </section>
	</div>
    </body>
</html>
